Title: ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.04527v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 01:35:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 

HOHYUN SIM ∗, Korea University, South Korea 

HYEONJOONG CHO †∗ , Korea University, South Korea 

ALI SHOKRI ‡, University of Houston, United States 

ZHOULAI FU §, State University of New York Korea, South Korea 

BINOY RAVINDRAN ¶, Virginia Tech, United States We present Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation, a two-phase pipeline for translating real-world C projects to safe Rust. Existing automated approaches either produce wholly unsafe output that offers no memory-safety guarantees, or translate functions in isolation and verify them independently, failing to detect cross-unit type mismatches or handle unsafe constructs that inherently require whole-program reasoning. Furthermore, function-level LLM pipelines require coordinated caller updates whenever a type signature changes, while project-scale systems fail to produce compilable output under real-world dependency complexity. Encrust addresses these limitations by decoupling boundary adaptation from function logic via an Application Binary Interface (ABI)-preserving wrapper pattern and validating every intermediate state against the fully integrated codebase. Phase 1 (Encapsulated Substitution) translates each function using an ABI-preserving wrapper pattern that splits it into two components: a caller-transparent shim retaining the original raw-pointer signature, and a safe inner function targeted by the LLM with a clean, scope-limited prompt. This design enables independent per-function type-signature changes with automatic rollback on failure, without requiring coordinated caller updates. A subsequent deterministic, type-directed wrapper elimination pass then removes the wrappers once translation succeeds. Phase 2 (Agentic Refinement) resolves unsafe constructs that exceed per-function scope, including static mut globals, skipped wrapper pairs, and failed translations, through an LLM agent operating on the whole codebase under a baseline-aware verification gate. We evaluate Encrust on 7 GNU Coreutils programs and 8 libraries from the Laertes benchmark (197,706 LoC, 2,366 functions), demonstrating substantial unsafe-construct reduction across all 15 programs while maintaining full test-vector correctness across all benchmarks. CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence ; • Software and its engineering 

→ General programming languages .Additional Key Words and Phrases: Large Language Model, C-to-Rust, Agent 

1 Introduction 

C remains one of the most widely deployed systems languages, forming the foundation of operating systems, embedded firmware, cryptographic libraries, and critical infrastructure. Yet C provides no bounds checking, no ownership model, and no lifetime tracking; these missing guarantees 

> ∗

Corresponding author: Hyeonjoong Cho Authors’ Contact Information: HoHyun Sim, tlaghgus0425@korea.ac.kr, Korea University, South Korea; Hyeonjoong Cho, raycho@korea.ac.kr, Korea University, South Korea; Ali Shokri, ashokri@Central.UH.EDU, University of Houston, United States; Zhoulai Fu, zhoulai.fu@sunykorea.ac.kr, State University of New York Korea, South Korea; Binoy Ravindran, binoy@vt.edu, Virginia Tech, United States. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 2475-1421/2018/4-ART https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018.  

> arXiv:2604.04527v1 [cs.SE] 6 Apr 2026 2HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran

are the root cause of a substantial fraction of real-world security vulnerabilities: buffer overflows, use-after-free errors, and data races continue to dominate CVE databases despite decades of tooling investment [ 1, 16 , 19 ]. Rust offers a compelling alternative, providing memory and thread safety through a borrow-checked ownership system with no garbage collection overhead [ 10 , 14 ]. Migrating existing C codebases to Rust would bring these guarantees to code that has already been hardened and battle-tested over decades, without discarding accumulated functionality and performance. This is a compelling prospect for safety-critical systems where rewrites from scratch are infeasible. Automated translation from C to Rust is, however, technically difficult. The closest off-the-shelf solution, C2Rust [ 8 ], applies syntactic rewriting rules to produce a Rust program that is behaviorally equivalent to the C source, but the output is wholly unsafe : every C pointer becomes a raw Rust pointer, and no ownership model is synthesized. The resulting code compiles and runs correctly, but it offers no memory-safety guarantees beyond what C already provides. Subsequent rule-based tools such as Laertes [4], Crown [22 ], and CRustS [11 ] reduce unsafe usage incrementally, but they are confined to the syntactic and type-level patterns they were explicitly designed for; semantic transformations such as replacing pointer arithmetic with iterators, converting null-terminated 

char* to &str , or introducing Result -based error handling remain out of reach. Large language models (LLMs) offer a path beyond pattern-based rewriting: they can understand program intent and generate idiomatic Rust that captures the semantics of C code in a human-readable, safe form. Recent LLM-based translation systems [ 2 , 3 , 15 , 20 , 21 , 23 ] have demonstrated impressive results on individual functions or small benchmarks; they typically translate each function in isolation and verify it independently, without assembling or testing the full codebase. Scaling to real projects, however, exposes two fundamental challenges that these approaches do not fully resolve. Function-level LLM pipelines such as C2SaferRust suffer from dependency propagation: any change to a function’s type signature must be coordinated across all callers, a cascading overhead that grows with project scale. Project-scale systems such as EvoC2Rust attempt to sidestep this constraint but produce output that does not compile on any of the seven Coreutils programs we evaluate (functional correctness 0% across all seven), because cross-unit dependencies remain unverified until the full codebase is assembled. Encrust addresses both failure modes. 

Challenge 1: decomposing translation complexity at ABI boundaries. Real C projects at scale involve deeply interleaved function dependencies: functions share types, calling conventions, and global state across many files. A natural approach is to supply each function to the LLM together with its full boundary context—call sites, global variable accesses, and imports—so that the model can reason about how the translated function will fit into its surroundings. This context, however, substantially increases the difficulty of each individual translation task: the LLM must simultaneously produce a type-correct function body, a signature compatible with every call site, and correct handling of any shared global state, all in a single generation step. The compounded complexity raises the per-function failure rate, depressing the overall function compilance pass rate even when each sub-problem is individually tractable. What is needed is a mechanism that 

separates the boundary adaptation concern from the function logic concern, allowing the LLM to focus on one at a time. 

Challenge 2: the limits of per-function scope. Per-function translation is insufficient in two respects: verification scope and transformation scope .

Verification scope. Even when every individual translation compiles and passes its local tests, the integrated crate may still fail: inter-unit dependencies invisible at the per-function level surface as type mismatches, unresolved symbols, or semantic divergences only when the full codebase is  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 3

assembled. Correctness must therefore be verified on the whole integrated crate, not on isolated translation units. 

Transformation scope. Several categories of unsafe constructs are inherently intractable within a single function’s scope. Static mut globals are accessed across many files simultaneously; eliminating them safely requires reasoning about every read, write, and address-of site across the entire program. Similarly, unsafe constructs whose signatures are shared across many call sites cannot be resolved without coordinated multi-file edits that a single per-function generation step cannot produce. Both respects call for a translation agent that operates on the whole codebase, guided by an end-to-end verification gate. 

Encrust . We present Encrust , a two-phase pipeline that addresses both challenges. 

Phase 1: Encapsulated Substitution (§3.1) resolves Challenge 1. It translates each function using an ABI-preserving wrapper pattern : each function is split into a thin wrapper that preserves the original name and C-compatible signature, and a safe inner function that implements the translation. The wrapper body consists exclusively of fixed let -binding templates that perform raw-to-safe type conversions at each parameter position, isolating all boundary-adaptation work in one dedicated shim. Consequently, the LLM prompt for the safe inner function is stripped of call-site obligations: it presents only the function’s own logic, the safe signatures of already-translated callees, and available safe struct definitions, rather than the raw-pointer signatures at every call site or the global variable layout. This focused prompt directly achieves the separation demanded by Challenge 1: the LLM reasons about boundary conversion and function logic in two separate, simpler steps rather than in one entangled generation. Untranslated callers continue to invoke the wrapper by its original name with raw pointer types; a failed translation is silently rolled back and the original unsafe body retained, so the crate remains compilable and test-passing at every step ( Live Scaffold Invariant ). After all functions are processed, a deterministic type-directed wrapper elimination pass rewrites call sites to invoke the safe inner functions directly, producing a wrapper-free crate. 

Phase 2: Agentic Refinement (§3.2) resolves Challenge 2. Residual unsafe patterns such as 

static mut globals involve complex cross-file dependencies that no per-function pass can resolve in isolation; addressing them requires whole-codebase visibility and coordinated multi-file edits. Phase 2 meets this requirement with an LLM agent equipped with 17 code-navigation and code-modification tools that operates on the entire codebase, guided by a baseline-aware verification gate: no transformation is committed unless the fully integrated crate compiles and passes the complete test suite, catching the cross-unit failures that per-function verification misses. We make the following contributions: 

• Encapsulated Substitution (§3.1.3, §3.1.4): a translation scheme that splits each function into a thin caller-transparent wrapper retaining the original name and raw-pointer signature, and a safe inner function with idiomatic Rust types that the LLM targets with a focused, boundary-free prompt, enabling independent per-function translation with silent rollback and no coordinated caller updates, followed by a compile-and-test-gated type-directed wrapper elimination (TDWE) pass. 

• An agentic refinement loop (§3.2): a multi-tool LLM agent with a task taxonomy, fixed processing order, and baseline-aware verification that resolves unsafe patterns requiring whole-codebase reasoning, plus the narrow set of unsafe-cast wrappers that TDWE pre-emptively deferred.  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. 4HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran

• Evaluation on real-world benchmarks (§4): an assessment on 7 GNU Coreutils programs and 8 Laertes libraries (197,706 LoC, 2,366 functions total) showing that Encrust substantially reduces unsafe usage while preserving full end-to-end correctness across all 15 programs. Unlike prior work, which verifies only isolated translation units, Encrust validates the fully integrated crate; for the Laertes libraries, which ship without test cases, we construct harnesses and generate 1,000 inputs per library via AFL++ coverage-guided fuzzing to enable this end-to-end check for the first time. 

2 Related Work 2.1 Rule-Based C-to-Rust Transpilation 

Early efforts to automate C-to-Rust migration rely on rule-based or static-analysis-driven transpila-tion, translating C syntax and semantics mechanically without large language models. 

C2Rust [8 ] is the most widely used starting point for automated C-to-Rust translation. It applies a fixed set of syntactic rewriting rules to produce Rust that is behaviorally equivalent to the input C, but the output is extensively unsafe: every C pointer becomes a raw pointer, and no ownership model is synthesized, meaning the generated code offers no memory-safety guarantees beyond what C already provides. 

Laertes [4 ] builds on C2Rust output and uses the Rust compiler as a blackbox oracle, iteratively applying transformation rules and fixing type errors until the program compiles, thereby rewriting a subset of raw pointers to safe Rust references. It is restricted, however, to pointers that are unsafe solely due to missing ownership and lifetime information, excluding those involved in pointer arithmetic, unsafe casts, or other confounding factors. Semantic restructuring such as replacing pointer arithmetic with iterators, null-terminated char* with &str, or C error codes with Result lies outside its scope. 

Crown [ 22 ] builds on C2Rust and applies ownership constraint analysis, using a SAT solver to infer whether each raw pointer is owning or non-owning, and retypes it accordingly to Box or a safe reference. 

CRustS [ 11 ] also post-processes C2Rust output, applying 220 TXL source-to-source transforma-tion rules to reduce unsafe keyword usage in function signatures and narrow the scope of unsafe blocks. Of these rules, 198 are strictly semantics-preserving and 22 are semantics-approximating, trading minor behavioral fidelity for greater safety. As with any rule-based approach, coverage is inherently limited to patterns anticipated at design time. All of the above tools share a common limitation: they operate on syntactic or type-level patterns that can be identified without understanding program intent. Semantic transformations such as replacing pointer arithmetic with iterators, converting null-terminated char* to &str , or introducing Result -based error handling require a level of comprehension that rule-based systems cannot provide. Our approach addresses this gap by using an LLM for semantic translation while retaining rule-based mechanisms for the systematic, deterministic aspects of type rewriting. 

2.2 LLM-Based C-to-Rust Translation 

LLM-based approaches split naturally into function-level systems that translate and verify each function in isolation, and project-scale systems that target whole repositories. Encrust belongs to the latter group; we survey both. 

2.2.1 Function-Level Translation. Early LLM-based work focuses on individual functions or small benchmarks. 

VERT [21 ] combines LLM-based and rule-based translation: it compiles the C program to We-bAssembly and lifts it to Rust via rWasm to produce a semantically correct oracle, while in parallel  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 5

using an LLM to generate a readable Rust candidate. The candidate is verified against the oracle using property-based testing and bounded model checking; if verification fails, a new candidate is regenerated. 

FLOURINE [ 5] replaces the WebAssembly oracle with differential fuzzing, checking input/output equivalence between the C original and the translated Rust without requiring pre-written tests. 

Syzygy [17 ] combines LLM-driven code and test translation guided by dynamic analysis, using execution information to ensure that the generated Rust code and its tests are mutually consistent and functionally equivalent to the original C. 

SmartC2Rust [ 18 ] segments the C program to fit within the LLM context window, then applies an iterative repair loop in which compilation errors, semantic discrepancies, and unsafe statements are each fed back to the LLM as separate repair signals until all errors are resolved. 

SACTOR [23 ] is a LLM-driven C-to-Rust translation tool that employs a two-step pipeline: an initial unidiomatic translation that preserves C semantics, followed by an idiomatic refinement that eliminates unsafe blocks to conform to Rust standards. Static analysis guides both stages by providing the LLM with hints on pointer semantics and dependency resolution, and correctness is verified via FFI-based end-to-end testing. 

SafeTrans [ 6 ] is a framework that iteratively repairs compilation and runtime errors in two phases: a basic repair phase using compiler feedback, followed by a few-shot guided repair phase that provides error-type-specific context and code examples to the LLM. The repair strategies are informed by an analysis of which Rust features LLMs most frequently mistranslate. 

TymCrat [ 9 ] focuses on type migration, i.e., replacing C types with appropriate idiomatic Rust types in function signatures. To handle the challenging many-to-many correspondence between C and Rust types, they introduce three techniques: generating candidates signatures, providing translated callee signatures as context to the LLM, and iteratively fixing type errors using compiler feedback. 

2.2.2 Project-Scale Translation. Several systems target whole-project migration, the regime most relevant to real-world adoption. 

RustMap [2] decomposes a C project into translation units ordered by usage dependencies, combining static analysis of syntactic structure with dynamic call graph profiling to determine translation order. Each unit is translated by an LLM with iterative repair driven by compilation and test feedback, and the translated units are composed into a runnable Rust program. A limitation is that correctness cannot be guaranteed for functions not exercised by the provided test cases. 

LLMigrate [12 ] addresses LLM “laziness” (the tendency to omit large code sections when processing long contexts) by splitting modules into individual functions using Tree-sitter, translating each independently, and reassembling them in call graph topological order. It is validated on three Linux kernel modules: math, sort, and ramfs. 

EvoC2Rust [ 20 ] introduces a three-stage skeleton-guided pipeline for project-level translation: it first decomposes the C project into functional modules and uses a feature-mapping-enhanced LLM to transform definitions and macros, producing type-checked function stubs that form a compilable Rust skeleton; it then incrementally fills in each stub with a full function translation; finally, it applies a cascading repair chain that combines rule-based transformations and LLM-driven refinement to resolve remaining compilation errors. 

Rustine [3 ] is a fully automated pipeline for repository-level C-to-Rust translation that works from scratch rather than building on C2Rust output. It applies program analysis to refactor the C source prior to translation, resolving preprocessor directives, minimizing pointer operations, and extracting caller-callee and lifetime dependencies to guide translation order, and employs a  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. 6HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran

two-tier LLM strategy that escalates to a reasoning model only on failure. Compared to six prior approaches, the resulting Rust code is safer, more idiomatic, and more readable. 

C2SaferRust [15 ] combines C2Rust and LLMs in a neuro-symbolic pipeline: it first uses C2Rust 

to produce an initial unsafe Rust version, then decomposes it into function-level slices ordered by static dependency analysis. Each slice is augmented with dataflow and call graph context derived from static analysis before being passed to an LLM for translation into safer Rust, with compiler and test feedback driving iterative repair until the slice compiles and passes end-to-end tests. 

IRENE [13 ] enhances LLM-based translation by combining a rule-augmented retrieval module, which selects relevant translation examples using syntactic rules from a static analyzer, with a structured summarization module that generates a semantic summary of the C code. Both outputs are composed into a single prompt, and an error-driven module applies iterative compiler-feedback refinement to correct translation errors.           

> Fig. 1. Encrust two-phase translation pipeline. Phase 1 (left): for each function, the LLM generates a wrapper/safe-function pair verified through a compile-and-test loop; successfully translated pairs are collected into rust_safe/ . After all functions are translated, type-directed wrapper elimination rewrites call sites to invoke safe functions directly, yielding a wrapper-free crate rust_safe_remap/ .Phase 2 (right): an LLM agent equipped with 17 tools resolves the unsafe patterns deferred from Phase 1— static mut globals, unsafe-cast wrapper pairs, failed struct translations, and functions that exhausted the per-function retry budget—through an iterative loop governed by a compile-and-test verification gate.

3 ENCRUST 3.1 Phase 1: Encapsulated Substitution 

Encrust structures the translation as a two-phase pipeline (Figure 1) whose design is governed throughout by the coexistence constraint : at every intermediate step, the partially translated crate must compile and pass the full test suite, because untranslated callers continue to depend on already-replaced functions using their original raw-pointer signatures. The C source is first transpiled to unsafe Rust by C2Rust , yielding a behaviorally equivalent but wholly unsafe base crate ( rust/ ). Phase 1 (Figure 1, left) transforms rust/ into a safe equivalent through four ordered stages that operate on two parallel working copies: rust_test/ serves as  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 7

the live compile-and-test scaffold, while rust_safe/ accumulates verified safe function pairs. Preprocessing (§3.1.1) computes a leaf-first translation order and builds LLM prompting context; struct translation (§3.1.2) generates safe counterpart types for C-originated structs; per-function translation (§3.1.3) replaces each function with an ABI-preserving wrapper/safe-function pair verified through compile-and-test; and type-directed wrapper elimination (§3.1.4) rewrites all call sites, producing a wrapper-free crate ( rust_safe_remap/ ). 

Phase 2 (§3.2) resolves the unsafe patterns deferred from Phase 1: static mut globals, unsafe-cast wrapper pairs pre-emptively skipped by TDWE, and failed translations, through an LLM agent that navigates, edits, compiles, and tests the Phase 1 output in an iterative loop. Phase 1’s design is governed throughout by the coexistence constraint. Three choices follow directly: dual-struct preservation (§3.1.2), the wrapper pattern (§3.1.3), and per-function failure isolation (§3.1.3). All are expressed in the following invariant, which Encrust maintains throughout Phase 1: 

Invariant 1 (Live Scaffold). At every point during Phase 1, the rust_test/ crate compiles and passes the full test-vector suite. Concretely: (1) Before any stage begins: the C2Rust -generated crate compiles (ensured by C2Rust itself). (2) After each struct translation step: the newly appended safe struct block and its conversion implementations compile; a failure is corrected by truncating the file to its pre-insertion length, restoring the prior state. (3) After each per-function translation step: the wrapper/safe pair inserted into rust_test/ 

compiles and all test vectors pass; a persistent failure triggers a full-file snapshot rollback and the original unsafe body is retained, leaving the crate unchanged. (4) After type-directed wrapper elimination: the remapped crate rust_safe_remap/ is verified by rerunning the test-vector suite; any regression causes the wrapper to be restored, reverting to 

rust_safe/ .

The four stages are described next: preprocessing, struct translation, per-function translation, and type-directed wrapper elimination. Concrete code examples using gettext_quote (quotearg.c )and the quoting_options struct appear from §3.1.2 onward, where the running example first becomes relevant. 

3.1.1 Preprocessing. Before any LLM call is made, Phase 1 establishes the context every subsequent stage depends on: a decomposition of the code into translatable units, a leaf-first translation order, and a C-to-Rust source mapping for prompt construction. 

Decomposition. Encrust decomposes both source representations into function-level records. From the C source, each function’s name, source location, and body are extracted, along with struct definitions used during struct translation (§3.1.2). From the C2Rust Rust output, each function record captures its source text, file span, direct callees, referenced globals, extern "C" blocks, and 

use imports. 

Translation ordering. Encrust orders functions leaf-first using the call graph derived from the Rust decomposition: callees are translated before their callers so that each function’s safe callee signatures are available for prompt construction. For genuine strongly connected components, an arbitrary order is chosen (deterministically by function name); any resulting type mismatches surface as compile errors in the per-function retry loop and are repaired there. 

C-to-Rust source mapping. Since C2Rust preserves C function names verbatim, each Rust function record is matched to its C source by name lookup.  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. 8HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran

3.1.2 Struct Translation. Before translating functions, Encrust generates safe counterparts for 

c2rust -produced structs with raw pointer fields. For each such struct 𝑆 , replacing it in place would break all call sites the moment any field type changed; Encrust instead preserves 𝑆 unchanged and appends a parallel safe struct ˆ𝑆 (Definition 1) to the same source file as the dual-struct representation, so that safe code operates on ˆ𝑆 while the C ABI boundary remains intact. 

Struct Classification. Structs are classified into three mutually exclusive categories: 

• System structs : types whose definitions originate from OS or libc headers ( FILE , stat , passwd , dirent 

, etc.). These represent kernel-defined layouts that must remain #[repr(C)] ; generating a safe counterpart would serve no purpose since they cannot be reconstructed from safe Rust types. They are retained as-is. 

• Pointer-free structs : structs whose every field is a primitive, a fixed-size array, or another pointer-free struct. Rust’s type system already provides full safety guarantees for such types; no transfor-mation is needed. 

• Translatable structs : structs that originate from C source (not from anonymous c2rust -internal unions) and contain at least one raw pointer field. These are the sole target of safe struct abstraction generation. 

Safe Struct Abstraction. For each translatable struct, the LLM prompt supplies two inputs: (1) the 

c2rust -generated unsafe Rust struct 𝑆 already present in rust_test , which defines the exact field names and raw types the LLM must work with; and (2) optionally, the original C struct source as a 

semantic hint , helping the LLM infer field intent ( e.g., whether a *mut c_uint is a nullable scalar or a length-bounded array). The C source is context only; the transformation target is always 𝑆 , the unsafe Rust struct. 

Definition 1 (Safe Struct Abstraction). Given a c2rust -generated unsafe Rust struct 𝑆 

already present in rust_test , a safe struct abstraction for 𝑆 consists of three components: 

• A safe struct ˆ𝑆 : a pub struct named in CamelCase whose fields replace the raw pointer types of 𝑆 

with safe Rust counterparts: string pointers become Option<CString> , length-paired pointers become 

> Vec<T>

, nullable scalar pointers become Option<Box<T>> , and primitives are unchanged. 

• A materialisation function from 𝑆 : & 𝑆 → ˆ𝑆 , realised as impl From<&S> for ˆ𝑆 , that copies all pointer-reachable data of 𝑆 into fresh Rust-owned allocations (Invariant 2). 

• A projection function to _raw 𝑆 : & ˆ𝑆 → 𝑆 , realised as a to_raw(&self) -> S method, that constructs a value of type 𝑆 whose pointer fields alias into ˆ𝑆 ’s allocations. The returned 𝑆 borrows from ˆ𝑆 and must not outlive it. 

Safe code operates exclusively on ˆ𝑆 ; wrappers call from 𝑆 at entry and to _raw 𝑆 at C-ABI boundaries (§3.1.3). A representative safe struct abstraction for quoting_options is shown in the supplementary material. When an array length cannot be reliably inferred from the C source (no integer field is paired with the pointer in the struct), the LLM is instructed to use a conservative fixed bound and annotate it with a // FIXME: inferred length comment; if the compile-and-test loop rejects the result, the struct translation is rolled back and the struct is recorded in failed_structs for Phase 2 struct migration (§3.3). 

Memory Ownership Discipline. The correctness of the materialisation function from 𝑆 rests on a non-obvious ownership constraint that arises specifically from the incremental nature of Phase 1. During translation, safe and unsafe functions coexist in the same crate. An untranslated function may hold a live reference to the same raw struct 𝑆 that a translated function has just converted via from 𝑆 . If from 𝑆 transferred ownership of a pointer field (e.g., via CString::from_raw(raw.left_quote) ),  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 9

the resulting CString would free the C-allocated memory when it is dropped at the end of the safe function’s scope. Any subsequent access to raw.left_quote by the still-live untranslated function would then constitute a use-after-free. This hazard is especially acute for string literals: in C, string literals reside in read-only memory segments; calling free on them causes an immediate trap. We therefore require the following invariant, which is communicated verbatim to the LLM in its prompt alongside counterexamples: 

Invariant 2 (Copy, Never Own). Every from 𝑆 implementation must copy all pointer-reachable data into fresh Rust-owned allocations. Specifically: (1) String fields: use CStr::from_ptr(p).to_owned() . CString::from_raw(p) is prohibited: it claims ownership of C memory and frees it on drop. (2) Buffer fields: use slice::from_raw_parts(p, n).to_vec() . Vec::from_raw_parts(p, n, cap) is prohibited. (3) Scalar pointer fields: use Box::new(*p) to copy the pointed-at value. (4) In to_raw() : return pointers via .as_ptr() into the safe struct’s allocations; never call Box::into_raw() 

on a cloned value, as that leaks memory. The caller must ensure the returned 𝑆 does not outlive ˆ𝑆 .Enforcement. The compile-and-test loop provides a dynamic safety net for violations of Invariant 2: a generated from implementation that incorrectly transfers ownership will typically trigger a use-after-free or double-free detectable at test time. Because test-vector coverage is not exhaustive, enforcement is best-effort; violations in untested code paths remain undetected. With safe struct abstractions appended to rust_test/ , per-function translation can use ˆ𝑆 types in safe function bodies while the original #[repr(C)] structs remain intact at every C-ABI boundary. 

3.1.3 Per-Function Translation. Per-function translation processes each function in leaf-first order. The central challenge is how to replace a function’s implementation without breaking the call sites of untranslated callers; the wrapper pattern resolves this. 

The Wrapper Pattern. A direct replacement of a function body would change its type signature, breaking every call site that still passes raw C types. To preserve callability across the translation boundary, Encrust replaces the original function with two definitions: 

Definition 2 (Wrapper Pattern). Given an unsafe function 𝑓 with C-compatible signature 

𝑓 : 𝑇 1 × · · · × 𝑇 𝑛 → 𝑇 𝑟 , the wrapper pattern produces: 

• f_safe : ˆ𝑇 1 × · · · × ˆ𝑇 𝑛 → ˆ𝑇 𝑟 , the safe inner function . It carries the suffix _safe and accepts safe Rust types ˆ𝑇 𝑖 : C strings become &CStr , length-paired pointers become slices ( &[T] / &mut [T] ), nullable pointers become Option<&T> , and primitives are unchanged. It implements the function’s logic without raw pointer operations wherever possible. 

• 𝑓 : 𝑇 1 × · · · × 𝑇 𝑛 → 𝑇 𝑟 , the wrapper function . It preserves the original name, signature, and qualifiers ( unsafe , pub , extern "C" , #[no_mangle] , #[inline] ). Its body consists exclusively of type-conversion let bindings that shadow the original parameter names, followed by a single call to f_safe .

This decomposition has three essential properties: ABI preservation (the wrapper retains the original name, signature, and calling convention, so all call sites compile unchanged); safety isolation 

(unsafe operations are confined to the wrapper’s simple let-bindings, while the safe function is maximally free of unsafe ); and the name-shadowing property (each parameter is re-bound under its original identifier, enabling the TDWE pass (§3.1.4) to rewrite call sites by textual substitution without alpha-renaming).                                       

> 1// (1) Safe inner function: safe Rust types
> 2fn quotearg_safe(
> 3name: &std::ffi:: CStr ,
> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. 10 HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran
> 4count: & mut libc::c_int,
> 5) {
> 6let s = name.to_str().unwrap_or("");
> 7*count += s.chars()
> 8.filter(|c| *c == ’"’)
> 9.count() as libc::c_int;
> 10 }
> 11 12 // (2) Wrapper: identical signature to the c2rust original
> 13 #[no_mangle]
> 14 pub unsafe extern "C" fn quotearg(
> 15 name: *const libc::c_char,
> 16 count: * mut libc::c_int,
> 17 ) {
> 18 // name-shadowing: same identifier, converted type
> 19 let name = std::ffi:: CStr ::from_ptr(name);
> 20 let count = & mut *count;
> 21 quotearg_safe(name, count)
> 22 }

Listing 1. Wrapper pattern for a function taking a C string and a pointer-to-integer. Lines 13–14 show the name-shadowing property: the same identifier is reused for the converted value. 

Compile-Test Loop and Snapshot Rollback. The LLM prompt for each function 𝑓 supplies the original C source, the C2Rust Rust body, safe callee signatures, and safe struct definitions ˆ𝑆 ; the LLM emits a pair conforming to Definition 2. Once the candidate pair is emitted, Encrust inserts it into rust_test and attempts to compile the crate. A compile failure triggers a retry: the compiler error message is appended to the prompt and a new candidate is requested. If compilation succeeds, 

Encrust runs the project’s test-vector suite; a test failure is likewise fed back as a repair signal. To prevent a failed candidate from corrupting subsequent translations, the target source file is snapshotted before each insertion and restored on any persistent failure. If a function cannot be translated within the retry budget (five attempts), its original unsafe body is retained and translation proceeds to the next function in order; the live scaffold invariant ensures the crate continues to compile throughout. We treat compile-and-test passage as the per-function correctness criterion: a translation is accepted when the crate compiles without errors and all test vectors pass, establishing behavioral compatibility with the original C program on the provided inputs. 

3.1.4 Type-Directed Wrapper Elimination (TDWE). With every translated function represented as a wrapper/safe pair, the wrappers are now redundant: call sites can invoke 𝑓 _safe directly, giving every exported symbol a safe Rust signature and eliminating the naming indirection and wrapper boilerplate. 

Approach. Wrapper elimination is tractable because the wrapper pattern (§3.1.3) enforces a uniform structure: each wrapper body is a flat sequence of let-bindings followed by a single tail call to 𝑓 _safe , so the per-parameter conversions are already written down and need not be re-derived. The pass extracts these conversions from each wrapper’s let-bindings (using the last binding for re-bound parameters) and rewrites every call site 𝑓 (𝑎 1, . . . , 𝑎 𝑛 ) to 𝑓 _safe (cvt (𝑎 1), . . . , cvt (𝑎 𝑛 )) .When direct extraction is ambiguous ( e.g., the wrapper body contains control flow or the caller has already partially converted its arguments), the pass applies a six-layer fallback strategy in order: (1) Direct match : if the argument type already equals the safe parameter type, it is passed through unchanged. (2) Cross-module struct : detect *const S arguments corresponding to cross-module struct types and synthesize a conversion using the struct’s From implementation. 

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018.

ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 11 

(3) Null-pointer optimization : null_mut() arguments in already-translated callers become None for 

> Option

-typed parameters. (4) Safe-caller undo : if the call site is inside an already-translated safe function, undo any prior safe-to-raw conversion applied to the argument. (5) Slice synthesis : merge a (*mut T, size) argument pair into \&mut [T] via from\_raw\_parts\_mut .(6) Type-level fallback : synthesize a conversion from the raw and safe parameter types alone, without consulting the wrapper body. If none of the six layers produces a valid conversion for a given call site, the call to 𝑓 is left unchanged and the wrapper is retained; the crate remains compilable. Listing 2 illustrates the pass on the running example. gettext_quote in rust_safe/ consists of a safe inner function ( gettext_quote_safe ) and a wrapper that accepts a raw *const c_char and converts it to &CStr via CStr::from_ptr . The remapping pass (1) reads the single let-binding let msgid = CStr::from_ptr (msgid) from the wrapper body to derive cvt (msgid ) = CStr :: from _ptr (msgid ); (2) removes the wrapper; (3) renames gettext_quote_safe to gettext_quote and promotes it to pub ; and (4) rewrites every call site to apply the extracted conversion to each raw-pointer argument.                                                           

> 1// ===== rust_safe/ (before elimination) =====
> 23// Safe inner function (private)
> 4fn gettext_quote_safe(msgid: & CStr , s: quoting_style) -> * const libc::c_char { /* ... */ }
> 56// Wrapper: accepts raw pointer, converts, delegates
> 7unsafe extern "C" fn gettext_quote(
> 8mut msgid: * const libc::c_char, mut s: quoting_style,
> 9) -> * const libc::c_char {
> 10 let msgid = CStr ::from_ptr(msgid); // cvt extracted here
> 11 gettext_quote_safe(msgid, s)
> 12 }
> 13 14 // Call sites pass raw pointers directly to wrapper
> 15 left_quote = gettext_quote(b" `\0" as *const u8 as *const libc::c_char, quoting_style);
> 16 right_quote = gettext_quote(b" '\0" as *const u8 as *const libc::c_char, quoting_style);
> 17 18 // ===== rust_safe_remap/ (after elimination) =====
> 19 20 // Wrapper removed; safe function promoted to public API
> 21 pub fn gettext_quote(msgid: & CStr , s: quoting_style) -> * const libc::c_char { /* ... */ }
> 22 23 // Call sites rewritten
> 24 left_quote = gettext_quote(
> 25 unsafe {CStr ::from_ptr(b" `\0" as *const u8 as *const libc::c_char) }, quoting_style);
> 26 right_quote = gettext_quote(
> 27 unsafe {CStr ::from_ptr(b" '\0" as *const u8 as *const libc::c_char) }, quoting_style);

Listing 2. Type-directed wrapper elimination for gettext_quote (GNU Coreutils cat ). Before : rust_safe/ 

contains a wrapper/safe pair (Definition 2); call sites pass raw *const c_char pointers. After : the wrapper is removed, gettext_quote_safe is promoted to pub gettext_quote , and every call site is rewritten by applying and every call site is rewritten accordingly. 

Compile-and-Test as the Universal Failure Gate. TDWE attempts elimination on every wrap-per/safe pair and relies on the same compile-and-test gate that governs Phase 1 function translation (§3.1.3) to decide whether each attempt succeeds. Before attempting elimination of 𝑓 , TDWE snapshots the affected source files; after rewriting the call sites and deleting 𝑓 , it compiles the crate and runs the full test-vector suite. If both stages pass, the elimination is committed; otherwise the snapshot is restored and 𝑓 ’s wrapper is retained unchanged, preserving the Live Scaffold Invariant. This design is consistent with the system’s broader correctness principle and renders pre-emptive classification of “hard” cases unnecessary. Cases that earlier wrapper-elimination approaches handled conservatively all produce detectable failures under compile-and-test: variadic signatures 

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. 12 HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran 

cannot be given a safe Rust call-site rewrite and produce a compile error; complex return or parameter types (e.g., Result<T,E> , slice-of-references) cause type-mismatch errors at rewritten call sites; chain dependencies (a call site inside a not-yet-remapped wrapper) produce either a type error or a test failure that the gate intercepts. In every such case the rollback fires and the wrapper is retained without any special-case logic. TDWE processes wrappers in the same leaf-first order established by Phase 1 (§3.1.1), so callees are remapped before their callers. This ordering minimises chain-dependency conflicts without requiring explicit deferral logic: when a caller’s call site is rewritten, its callees have already been remapped to safe signatures and the types are consistent. 

Single Genuine Pre-emptive Skip: Unsafe-Cast Function-Pointer Use. One category requires a targeted pre-check because compile-and-test alone cannot detect the failure. When 𝑓 is referenced in an unsafe-cast expression such as f as *const () , f as *mut () , or f as unsafe extern "C" fn(...) , the cast discards 𝑓 ’s type, so renaming 𝑓 ’s signature from raw-pointer to safe types leaves the cast expression syntactically valid and the crate continues to compile. The stored raw address, however, now refers to a function with a different calling convention, producing undefined behaviour at the call site without any compile error or test signal unless the unsafe-cast code path happens to be exercised by the test suite. For typed function-pointer use ( e.g., let fp: fn(*const c_char) = f or Some(f) ), a signature change produces a type-mismatch compile error that the rollback gate intercepts correctly; no pre-check is needed. TDWE therefore applies one targeted scan before attempting elimination: it searches all source files for occurrences of the pattern f as *const /f as *mut /f as unsafe . If any unsafe-cast site referencing 

𝑓 is found, the pair is deferred to Phase 2’s wrapper_removal task (§3.2.3), which can retain a minimal unsafe extern "C" shim preserving the C-ABI address while documenting the remaining unsafe contract. In all other cases the wrapper is left in place only when the compile-and-test gate fires, so the crate continues to compile and pass the test suite unchanged. When the same wrapper/safe pair appears in two different source files (a duplicate arising from multi-file crates), the pass designates one file as the canonical module (chosen deterministically by lexicographic file path for reproducibility) and applies full remapping there; the duplicate module has its wrapper and safe function replaced by a use re-export of the canonical name, preserving ABI visibility without duplicating code. A final reduce_unsafe_constructs pass removes residual unsafe block wrappers around calls that no longer require them. Phase 1 thus delivers rust_safe_remap/ : a crate that compiles, passes the test suite, and is free of wrapper indirection. Three categories of unsafe constructs remain deferred to Phase 2 by their nature, plus a narrow fourth category arising from the single pre-emptive skip: static mut globals (require whole-program reasoning), unsafe-cast wrapper/safe pairs deferred by TDWE’s pre-check (§3.1.4), failed struct translations, and functions that exhausted Phase 1’s per-function retry budget. Phase 2 (§3.2) resolves these through six task types. The four deferred categories map directly to static_mut , wrapper_removal , struct_migration , and 

function_translate tasks; struct_use_migrate is a follow-on that updates call sites after struct migration completes; and dead_code is a final cleanup sweep run after all translations finish. 

3.2 Phase 2: Agentic Refinement 

The four deferred categories from §3.1.4 are addressed by Phase 2 (Figure 1, right) with an LLM agent equipped with 17 tools. Three of the four categories require multi-step, whole-codebase reasoning that inherently exceeds Phase 1’s per-function scope: static mut globals, failed struct translations,  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 13

and functions that exhausted the retry budget. The fourth, unsafe-cast wrapper pairs, was pre-emptively skipped by TDWE because the compile-and-test gate cannot detect the resulting silent undefined behaviour; Phase 2 handles these agentically with explicit unsafe-cast site inspection. Phase 2 addresses all four with an LLM agent equipped with 17 tools (Table 1), running an iterative loop that reads, edits, compiles, and tests until each task passes a verification gate. Because Phase 1 has already migrated most callers to safe types, Phase 2 transforms code in place rather than introducing new wrapper pairs. Intermediate results are persisted to disk so that an interrupted run can be resumed without repeating completed tasks. 

Task discovery and processing order. Phase 2 decomposes residual work into transformation tasks 

and processes them in a fixed type-level order: (1) static_mut — one task per static mut declaration found by scanning the workspace. (2) wrapper_removal — one task per f/f_safe pair that TDWE pre-emptively skipped due to an unsafe-cast site referencing 𝑓 (§3.1.4), identified by rescanning the workspace for the pattern 

> f as *const

/f as *mut .(3) struct_migration — one task per struct that Phase 1 failed to translate. (4) struct_use_migrate — one task per function whose signature references a raw struct type 𝑆 

for which struct_migration just produced a safe counterpart ˆ𝑆 ; updates the function’s pa-rameter types and all call sites from 𝑆 to ˆ𝑆 . This task type always runs immediately after 

struct_migration is complete. (5) function_translate — one task per function that exhausted Phase 1’s retry budget, sorted leaf-first by call-graph order. (6) dead_code — a single cleanup task run last, after all translations are complete. The rationale for this order is as follows. static_mut elimination runs first so that subsequent tasks never encounter unresolved global state. wrapper_removal runs second: the unsafe-cast wrappers it handles are already written in terms of Phase 1-safe types, so their call-site rewrites are independent of struct layout; resolving them before struct migration avoids ambiguity between raw and safe struct uses during call-site rewriting. struct_migration and struct_use_migrate then complete the struct API before function_translate begins, ensuring that function translation tasks can assume a fully migrated type environment. 

3.2.1 The Agentic Execution Loop. Each task is handled by a single agent conversation : an LLM equipped with a task-specific system prompt and 17 tools, running in a loop until it calls complete_task 

or exhausts the iteration budget ( MAX_ITER = 40). The loop is governed by three mechanisms: a ver-ification gate that enforces behavioral correctness, checkpoints for safe rollback, and stall-detection heuristics to escape repetitive tool-call patterns. 

Tool suite. Table 1 lists the 17 tools grouped into five categories (Navigation, Modification, Analysis, Verification, Control). 

Verification gate. The LLM signals completion by calling complete_task(summary) . This call does not immediately mark the task done; the loop intercepts it and runs a two-stage gate: (1) cargo build (debug): on failure the compile errors are returned as a tool result and the LLM must fix them before calling complete_task again; (2) cargo build –release followed by all test vectors: on failure the failing tests are returned. Only when both stages pass is the task marked Completed .The gate additionally applies baseline-aware acceptance : before Phase 2 begins, the orchestrator records which test vectors pass on the unmodified Phase 1 output. If stage (2) fails but every failing test also failed in that baseline, the gate treats the outcome as non-regressing and still marks the  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. 14 HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran

Table 1. Phase 2 tool suite (17 tools). All tools operate on the working copy of rust_safe_remap/ .

Category Tool Description 

Navigation 

grep Regex search across the workspace; re-turns matching file:line pairs with sur-rounding context 

read_file Read file contents with an optional start/end line range 

read_function Extract a complete function body by brace-depth counting 

get_function_signatures List all function signatures declared in a given file 

list_files Enumerate all .rs source files in the workspace Modification 

replace Exact-match replacement of a unique string in a single file 

regex_replace Regex-based replacement with capture-group back-references 

replace_function Replace an entire function body identified by its name 

delete_function Delete a function together with its pre-ceding attributes 

batch_replace Atomic multi-file replacement applied in a single operation Analysis find_static_mut_usages Classify all read, write, and address-of sites of a static mut ; performs signal-reachability analysis 

self_reflect Count remaining unsafe blocks, unsafe functions, and raw pointer occurrences Verification compile Run cargo build in debug or release mode; return compiler diagnostics on fail-ure 

run_tests Build the release binary and execute the full test-vector suite Control 

checkpoint Snapshot all .rs files and Cargo.toml to a named restore point 

rollback Restore the workspace to a previously saved named snapshot 

complete_task Signal task completion; triggers the two-stage verification gate 

task Completed , preventing pre-existing Phase 1 failures from permanently blocking otherwise correct transformations. 

Claim 1 (Verification Gate Soundness). A task is marked Completed only when cargo build 

succeeds and no test vector that passed in the Phase 1 baseline is caused to fail. No completed task introduces a new compilation error or a test regression relative to the Phase 1 baseline. Proof. By construction of the two-stage gate (§3.2.1).  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 15

Checkpoint and rollback. Before each task begins, the orchestrator snapshots the workspace state. The LLM can roll back to this snapshot at any point to discard partial edits and restart from a clean state. If a task exhausts its iteration budget without passing the verification gate, the orchestrator automatically restores the pre-task snapshot, ensuring failed tasks do not corrupt the workspace for subsequent tasks. Completed tasks are never rolled back; subsequent tasks therefore see exactly the cumulative effect of all previously completed work. 

Stall recovery. After five consecutive compile failures, the loop injects a task-specific hint (try a simpler type, rollback, or retain unsafe fn with a // SAFETY: comment). Cyclic tool-call patterns are detected via a sliding window of (tool, argument-hash) fingerprints: period-1 spins (same call repeated), period-2 alternations ( 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐴, 𝐵, . . . ), and period-3 cycles ( 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶, 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶, . . . ) each trigger a diagnostic hint and clear the window. The complete pseudocode is given in the supplementary material. 

3.2.2 Static Mut Elimination. static mut declarations in C2Rust output represent C global variables; every access requires an unsafe block and is classified as undefined behaviour with-out additional synchronisation. One task is created per unique variable found by scanning the workspace. 

Signal-reachability. find_static_mut_usages determines whether a variable is reachable from a signal handler by BFS from registered handlers over an approximate call graph, and annotates each usage site with a signal_reachable flag. 

Safe replacement strategy. The LLM calls find_static_mut_usages("NAME") to classify all reads, writes, and address-of sites, then selects the simplest safe pattern from the following priority-ordered rules: (1) No writes, compile-time value → const X: T = val 

(2) No writes, runtime-init value → static X: T = val (non-mut) (3) Single write, init pattern → static X: OnceLock<T> 

(4) Scalar, any writes → static X: AtomicT 

(5) Complex / non-scalar → static X: OnceLock<Mutex<T>> 

Signal-reachable variables are restricted to rules 1, 2, and 4; OnceLock and Mutex are excluded because they are not async-signal-safe. After selecting a safe type, the LLM applies batch_replace 

to update the declaration and every usage site across all files, then iterates with compile until the crate builds cleanly. Listing 3 shows a representative transformation.                    

> 1// BEFORE: c2rust output
> 2static mut lines_printed: libc::c_int = 0 as libc::c_int;
> 3unsafe { lines_printed += 1; }
> 4unsafe {if lines_printed > limit { ... } }
> 56// AFTER: LLM chose AtomicI32 (signal-reachable)
> 7use std::sync::atomic::{AtomicI32, Ordering};
> 8static LINES_PRINTED: AtomicI32 = AtomicI32::new(0);
> 9LINES_PRINTED.fetch_add(1, Ordering::SeqCst);
> 10 if LINES_PRINTED.load(Ordering::SeqCst) > limit { ... }

Listing 3. Before and after Phase 2 static_mut elimination for a counter accessed from signal-handler context. 

3.2.3 Wrapper Removal. TDWE eliminates all wrapper/safe pairs except those pre-emptively skipped due to unsafe-cast function-pointer use (§3.1.4). Phase 2’s wrapper_removal task targets  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. 16 HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran

only this narrow residual set, discovered by rescanning the workspace for f/f_safe pairs where at least one f as *const /f as *mut site triggered TDWE’s pre-emptive skip. 

Removal strategy. The LLM inspects every unsafe-cast site and determines whether the C-ABI address of 𝑓 must remain stable ( e.g., the pointer is passed to an external C callback registration such as atexit or signal ) or whether the cast is incidental and can be rewritten to use the renamed safe function directly. If the address must be preserved, the LLM retains a minimal unsafe extern "C" shim for 𝑓 and inlines the safe logic into f_safe , documenting the retained contract with a 

// SAFETY: comment. If the cast can be rewritten, the LLM updates all unsafe-cast sites, rewrites direct call sites, deletes the wrapper, and renames f_safe to f restoring its original visibility and ABI attributes, then verifies through the standard compile-and-test gate. 

3.3 Struct Migration and Use Update 

Phase 2 generates one struct_migration task per struct that Phase 1 failed to translate, following the same strategy as §3.1.2: replace pointer fields with owned types, implement From<&RawS> 

(copying, never owning) and to_raw() , and append the safe struct in the same file. Once all struct_migration tasks complete, one struct_use_migrate task is run per function whose signature still references a raw struct type 𝑆 for which a safe counterpart ˆ𝑆 was just produced. The LLM updates the function’s parameter types from 𝑆 to ˆ𝑆 , rewrites the body to operate on ˆ𝑆 

fields directly (using to_raw() only at C-ABI boundaries), and propagates call-site updates across the workspace. Both task types complete before function_translate begins, ensuring a fully migrated type environment for subsequent translation. 

3.3.1 Function Translation. 

In-place transformation. Unlike Phase 1, Phase 2 transforms failed functions in place (no new wrapper pair is introduced), since most callers have already been migrated to safe types: 

• Remove unsafe from the signature (keep pub , extern "C" , #[no_mangle] as present). 

• Replace raw pointer parameters with safe Rust types ( *const c_char →&CStr , *mut T →&mut T , etc.). 

• Rewrite the body with safe idioms; wrap unavoidable unsafe operations in minimal unsafe { // SAFETY: ... } blocks. 

• Apply batch_replace to update all call sites across the workspace. This avoids introducing new wrapper pairs that would require further cleanup. 

Translation order. Tasks are sorted leaf-first by call-graph order: a function is scheduled only after its failed callees have been resolved, so each translation can assume its callees already have safe signatures. 

Workflow. The LLM reads the function and its call sites, rewrites the function in place, iterates compile until clean, then signals completion. For genuine FFI boundaries that cannot be made safe, the LLM retains unsafe fn with a // SAFETY: comment. 

3.3.2 Dead Code Cleanup. A single dead_code task runs after all other task types are complete. The LLM identifies and removes dead artifacts produced by earlier translation stages: wrapper functions whose paired safe function was subsequently inlined or renamed, unused safe structs and their conversion impls, unused imports, and empty extern "C" {} blocks. Each batch of removals is followed by recompilation to confirm no regressions. Formal correctness claims (behavioral preservation and ordering soundness) are stated in the supplementary material.  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 17

4 Experiments 4.1 Benchmarks 

We evaluate on two benchmark suites comprising 15 real-world C programs in total (Table 2 and Table 3). Both suites are used by prior C-to-Rust translation work [ 4, 15 , 22 ], enabling direct comparison. A key property of our evaluation is that all 15 programs are evaluated with correctness verification: unlike prior work on the Laertes suite, which reports safety metrics only because the libraries ship without test cases, we construct test harnesses and collect inputs via grey-box fuzzing for the Laertes libraries, enabling end-to-end behavioral validation on the full benchmark. 

GNU Coreutils. We use the 7-program GNU Coreutils benchmark introduced by Nitin et al. [ 15 ]. The programs range from 5,859 ( pwd ) to 14,423 ( tail ) lines of C, totalling 65,117 LoC and 1,210 functions, of which 314 are exercised by the test suite. Each program ships with 2–30 shell test scripts (63 scripts total) that were constructed using coverage-guided fuzzing by the benchmark authors [15]; we use these scripts directly as our correctness oracle.                                     

> Table 2. GNU Coreutils benchmark statistics [15]. “Covered” = functions exercised by the test suite.
> Program LoC Functions Covered Test scripts
> split 13,848 207 73 12
> pwd 5,859 127 16 2
> cat 7,460 166 37 4
> truncate 7,181 124 33 8
> uniq 8,299 167 34 3
> tail 14,423 266 76 30
> head 8,047 153 45 4
> Total 65,117 1,210 314 63

Laertes benchmark. We additionally evaluate on 8 of the 10 libraries in the Laertes benchmark [ 4 ], excluding xzoom and grabc because their graphical interfaces preclude automated test execution in a headless environment. The remaining 8 libraries range from 49 ( qsort ) to 106,123 ( optipng )lines of C, totalling 132,589 LoC and 1,156 functions. The Laertes libraries ship without test cases. To enable correctness verification and to match the end-to-end evaluation methodology of the Coreutils suite, we write a lightweight driver harness for each library that feeds arbitrary byte sequences from the fuzzer to the library’s public API, then collect test inputs using AFL++ [ 7 ]. Each candidate input is first executed against the original C binary; inputs that crash the C binary or produce non-deterministic output across two identical runs are discarded, retaining only inputs for which the C binary yields a stable, reproducible output to serve as a ground-truth oracle. From the surviving inputs we select 1,000 per library. The resulting inputs serve both as the correctness oracle for Phase 1’s compile-test loop and as the baseline for Phase 2’s verification gate. 

4.2 Metrics 

We measure translation quality along four dimensions. 

Safety metrics. To enable direct comparison with C2SaferRust [ 15 ], we adopt their five safety metrics: raw pointer declarations (*const T / *mut T type annotations), raw pointer dereferences 

(*<expr> occurrences in executable code), unsafe lines of code (total source lines enclosed in                                          

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. 18 HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran
> Table 3. Laertes benchmark statistics [4]. Test inputs are collected via AFL++ fuzzing (1,000 per library).
> Library LoC Functions Covered Test inputs
> tulipindicators 12,565 270 211 1,000
> optipng 106,123 495 224 1,000
> bzip2 4,417 65 31 1,000
> snudown 5,426 140 72 1,000
> lil 3,565 148 72 1,000
> genann 410 13 71,000
> urlparser 34 21 10 1,000
> qsort 49 441,000
> Total 132,589 1,156 631 8,000

unsafe{} blocks), unsafe type casts (transmute calls and unsafe coercions), and unsafe call expres-sions (function calls that appear inside unsafe blocks). The five metrics capture distinct facets of unsafety: a tool may eliminate unsafe blocks while leaving raw pointer declarations intact, or reduce dereferences without removing the enclosing unsafe scope. Reporting all five prevents misleading single-metric summaries and allows fine-grained comparison. For each program we report the absolute count under each metric before and after translation and compute the percentage reduction relative to the C2Rust baseline. 

Function compilance pass rate. We define the function compilance pass rate as the fraction of all functions whose LLM-based translation compiled successfully within the tool’s retry budget: Function comiliance pass rate = functions whose translation compiled total functions .

A function counts as passing if the translated code compiles; it counts as failing if every attempt results in a compilation error and the tool retains or falls back to the original unsafe body. The function compilance pass rate is applicable to any LLM-based translation tool that attempts per-function translation with compilation verification, including both Encrust and C2SaferRust ,which both perform incremental function-level translation with compile-and-test checking to maintain functional equivalence throughout the process. This metric measures the compile success rate of LLM-driven translation, independent of whether the resulting code passes test vectors (which is captured separately by the functional correctness metric). Crucially, the function compilance pass rate is also independent of the five safety metrics: a function whose unsafe body is retained due to a failed translation may still contribute to safety metric reduction through other transformations such as struct migration. 

Functional correctness. We verify end-to-end behavioral equivalence between the translated Rust binary and the original C program using two complementary counts. The test-script pass rate measures the fraction of test scripts that pass: for the Coreutils programs, these are the 63 shell scripts provided by the benchmark [ 15 ]; for the Laertes libraries, we count the fraction of the 1,000 AFL++-generated test inputs on which the translated binary agrees with the C oracle. The test-vector pass rate reports the same agreement at the granularity of individual input/output pairs, which is the unit used by Phase 1’s compile-test loop and Phase 2’s verification gate. By the Live Scaffold Invariant (Invariant 1), both measures must equal 100% at every intermediate step and in the final output; any deviation constitutes a correctness regression. Reporting functional correctness for both suites is a direct advantage over prior work: C2SaferRust [ 15 ], Laertes [ 4 ], and  

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 19

Crown [ 22 ] cannot provide correctness verification for the Laertes libraries because those libraries ship without test inputs. 

Idiomatic Rust quality. Beyond eliminating unsafe constructs, a high-quality C-to-Rust translation should produce code that follows idiomatic Rust conventions. We measure idiomatic quality by the number of Clippy warnings emitted on the final translated crate: Clippy warnings = cargo clippy 2>&1 | grep -c "ˆwarning" .

Clippy is the official Rust linter and flags patterns that compile correctly but deviate from community best practices, including redundant clones, inefficient iterator usage, unnecessary unsafe blocks that wrap safe operations, and opportunities to replace raw-pointer patterns with idiomatic slice or reference APIs. Fewer warnings indicate that the translated code is not merely safe but also conforms to the style expected by Rust developers, which directly affects maintainability. A lower Clippy warning count is better; a count of zero means Clippy raises no objections against the translated codebase. Unlike the five safety metrics, the Clippy warning count is independent of whether unsafe blocks are present: safe but non-idiomatic code (e.g., manual index loops instead of iterators) also raises warnings. We report this metric for Encrust ’s final output and for each baseline to characterise the idiomaticity gap between approaches. 

4.3 Experimental Setup 

LLM configuration. All translation steps in both phases use GPT-4o. Phase 1 allows up to five compile-test retries per function: on each retry the LLM receives the compiler error or test-failure output as additional context and regenerates the wrapper/safe-function pair. If all five attempts fail, the pipeline rolls back to the original unsafe body and advances to the next function. Phase 2 caps the agentic loop at 40 tool-call iterations per task; if the loop reaches the cap without the verification gate passing, the workspace is rolled back to the pre-task snapshot and the task is marked failed. All LLM calls use temperature = 0.0 to make the pipeline deterministic conditioned on the model’s weights and prompt. 

Baselines. We compare Encrust against three baselines, all run on the same Coreutils and Laertes programs under identical conditions. (B1) C2Rust [8 ]: the raw transpiler output with no further safety work; this serves as the lower bound and defines the safety-metric baselines from which all tools reduce. (B2) C2SaferRust [ 15 ]: a neuro-symbolic LLM-based pipeline evaluated on the same two benchmark suites with the same five safety metrics, enabling direct numeric comparison. 

(B3) EvoC2Rust [ 20 ]: a skeleton-guided, project-scale LLM pipeline that first generates compilable Rust stubs for the entire project and then fills each stub with a full function translation, making it the most architecturally comparable large-scale baseline. To ensure a controlled comparison, we run both C2SaferRust and EvoC2Rust with GPT-4o at temperature = 0.0, matching the configuration used by Encrust . Unlike C2Rust and C2SaferRust , EvoC2Rust translates C directly to Rust without relying on C2Rust as an intermediate; when it fails to translate a function, that function is absent from the output rather than present as unsafe code. Measuring the five safety metrics on an incomplete program would therefore undercount unsafe constructs and artificially inflate EvoC2Rust ’s apparent safety score. To ensure a fair comparison, we apply the following normalisation: for every function that EvoC2Rust fails to produce, we substitute the C2Rust -transpiled unsafe body of that function. Safety metrics are then measured on this completed, compilable crate, so that all three baselines and Encrust are evaluated on programs with the same set of functions. We evaluate Encrust along two dimensions. (1) Overall safety improvement covers Phase 1 translation coverage (function compilance pass rate), functional correctness preservation, and 

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018.

20 HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran 

unsafe-construct reduction relative to baselines across five safety metrics, reported jointly in §4.4. And (2) the marginal contribution of Phase 2 agentic refinement, examined as an ablation (§4.5). All experiments use the benchmarks and metrics defined in §4.1 and §4.2. 

Table 4. Safety and correctness metrics on the GNU Coreutils benchmark. Columns (all ↓ lower is better unless noted): Ptr.Decl = raw pointer declarations; Ptr.Deref = raw pointer dereferences; Unsafe LoC = unsafe lines of code; Unsafe Cast = unsafe type casts; Unsafe Call = unsafe call expressions; Comp.Rate (↑) = fraction of LLM-translated functions that compiled (N/A for systems without LLM function translation); Correct. (↑) = test-script pass rate; Clippy = cargo clippy warning count. EvoC2Rust Correct. = 0% and Clippy = N/A because the translated project does not compile. Best value per metric per program bolded ; second-best underlined .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

> Program System Ptr.Decl ↓Ptr.Deref ↓Unsafe LoC ↓Unsafe Cast ↓Unsafe Call ↓Comp.Rate ↑Correct. ↑Clippy ↓
> cat
> C2Rust 192 317 5,625 3,116 1,038 N/A 100% 546
> C2SaferRust 120 240 4,189 1,992 912 75.3% 100% 239
> EvoC2Rust 81 231 2,338 1,082 525 64% 0% N/A
> Encrust 95 170 3,407 1,463 1,076 95.8% 100% 211
> head
> C2Rust 192 442 6,245 3,488 1,378 N/A 100% 410
> C2SaferRust 141 351 4,699 2,464 1,189 69.9% 100% 247
> EvoC2Rust 65 309 3,525 1,799 902 59% 0% N/A
> Encrust 109 155 2,244 806 1,071 97.1% 100% 136
> pwd
> C2Rust 164 295 4,201 2,248 875 N/A 100% 370
> C2SaferRust 129 225 3,151 1,563 871 70.9% 100% 204
> EvoC2Rust 62 178 1,756 575 548 68% 0% N/A
> Encrust 80 49 1,180 228 748 99.2% 100% 108
> split
> C2Rust 252 656 11,324 5,979 2,353 N/A 100% 547
> C2SaferRust 214 540 9,250 4,663 2,212 53.6% 100% 394
> EvoC2Rust 91 437 6,022 3,107 1,383 58% 0% N/A
> Encrust 135 295 6,645 3,090 2,099 96.2% 100% 211
> tail
> C2Rust 389 1,092 11,663 5,869 2,580 N/A 100% 718
> C2SaferRust 297 847 8,818 3,739 2,433 61.7% 100% 469
> EvoC2Rust 173 812 7,870 3,805 1,918 49% 0% N/A
> Encrust 212 559 6,352 2,383 2,231 96.8% 100% 266
> truncate
> C2Rust 156 326 5,544 3,357 1,040 N/A 100% 386
> C2SaferRust 124 263 4,443 2,521 952 70.2% 100% 241
> EvoC2Rust 49 203 2,808 1,733 543 66% 0% N/A
> Encrust 76 174 3,427 1,586 1,074 94.0% 100% 214
> uniq
> C2Rust 227 343 6,066 3,590 1,150 N/A 100% 470
> C2SaferRust 166 250 4,397 2,340 1,025 68.9% 100% 293
> EvoC2Rust 67 215 2,656 1,429 556 64% 0% N/A
> Encrust 122 87 2,469 1,070 1,037 95.9% 100% 349
> Total
> C2Rust 1,572 3,471 50,668 27,647 10,414 N/A 100% 2,951
> C2SaferRust 1,191 2,716 38,947 19,282 9,594 66.0% 100% 2,087
> EvoC2Rust 588 2,385 26,975 13,530 6,375 59.7% 0% N/A
> Encrust 829 1,489 25,724 10,626 9,336 96.4% 100% 1,495

4.4 Evaluation 

Tables 4 and 5 report the five safety metrics for all four systems on the Coreutils and Laertes benchmarks respectively; Table 5 additionally reports the function compilance pass rate, functional correctness, and Clippy warning count. 

Safety reduction on Coreutils. Across all seven Coreutils programs Encrust reduces raw pointer dereferences by 55% and unsafe type casts by 60% relative to the C2Rust baseline, the two metrics where the wrapper pattern is most effective: safe inner functions eliminate pointer arithmetic entirely, and struct materialisation via From removes explicit as casts. Raw pointer declarations and unsafe lines of code are reduced by 44% and 46% respectively. Unsafe call expressions show 

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 21 

only a 7% reduction, because each wrapper function itself constitutes an unsafe call site; this metric therefore improves primarily through Phase 2 wrapper removal. Compared with C2SaferRust , Encrust reduces raw pointer dereferences by a further 42% and unsafe type casts by a further 42%, reflecting the structural advantage of the wrapper pattern over C2SaferRust ’s inline pointer annotation approach. EvoC2Rust reports nominally lower raw pointer declaration, unsafe lines, and unsafe call expression totals, but produces output that does not compile (functional correctness = 0% on all seven programs); its safety numbers are therefore not directly comparable. Encrust is the only system achieving both unsafe-construct reduction and 100% test correctness across the full Coreutils benchmark. 

Safety reduction on Laertes. Results for Laertes cover all eight libraries. Over the eight completed libraries, Encrust reduces raw pointer dereferences by 57% and unsafe type casts by 38% relative to 

C2Rust , consistent with the Coreutils trend. qsort and snudown show the largest relative reductions (raw pointer dereferences near zero for qsort), while lil and urlparser show more modest gains owing to their heavy use of multi-level pointers and function callbacks that the wrapper pattern does not fully eliminate. EvoC2Rust achieves lower totals on the Laertes suite, but correctness verification is unavailable for its output on these libraries, so the comparison is one-dimensional. 

Phase 1 translation coverage. Across all seven Coreutils programs, Encrust successfully translated 999 of 1,097 functions in Phase 1 (within the five-retry budget), and Phase 2 function_translate 

tasks recovered an additional 59 functions, yielding an overall function compilance pass rate of 96.4% (1,058/1,097). Per-program rates range from 94.0% ( truncate ) to 99.2% ( pwd ), with the remaining 3.6% of functions retained as their original unsafe bodies because every LLM attempt either failed to compile or failed the test-vector suite within the combined retry budget of both phases. 

Functional correctness. Encrust achieves 100% correctness on all seven Coreutils programs and all eight Laertes libraries (Tables 4–5), confirming that the Live Scaffold Invariant (§3.1.3) prevents any behavioral regression throughout translation. By contrast, EvoC2Rust scores 0% on both benchmarks because its translated projects do not compile. 

4.5 Ablation Study: Phase 2 Contribution 

To isolate the contribution of each phase, Table 6 compares three configurations on the five safety metrics and Clippy warning count: C2Rust (no translation), Phase 1 only ( rust_safe_remap/ ,after Type-Directed Wrapper Elimination), and the full Encrust pipeline (Phase 1 + Phase 2). Phase 1 alone reduces unsafe lines of code by 45.9% on Coreutils and 21.1% on Laertes relative to 

C2Rust , with the TDWE remapping step accepting 79.9% (1,210/1,514) of wrapper–safe function pairs. Raw pointer dereferences see the largest Phase 1 reduction (54.3% on Coreutils, 41.6% on Laertes), while unsafe call expressions improve only modestly (7.2% and 9.3% respectively), since each retained wrapper constitutes an unsafe call site. Phase 2 adds a further 6.1% relative reduction in raw pointer dereferences on Coreutils (total 57.1% over C2Rust ) and 42.9% on Laertes (total 66.6%), and reduces unsafe lines of code by a further 6.2% and 12.8% respectively, with all five metrics improving across both benchmark suites. Table 7 shows the Phase 2 task breakdown aggregated over all 15 programs. Encrust discovers 1,133 tasks and completes 790 (69.7%), averaging 21.0 agentic loop iterations per completed task. Structural tasks achieve the highest rates: struct_migration at 91.3% and struct_use_migrate 

at 93.3%, owing to their localised, well-typed rewrites (mean 10.7 and 3.8 iterations). dead_code 

cleanup is lowest (46.7%) because whole-project reachability reasoning frequently exceeds the 

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018.

22 HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran 

Table 5. Safety and correctness metrics on the Laertes benchmark. Column definitions as in Table 4. 

Comp.Rate : fraction of LLM-translated functions that compiled within the retry budget ( Encrust and 

EvoC2Rust ); N/A for C2Rust (no LLM translation). Correct. : test-vector pass rate (100% = all inputs match C reference output). All 8 libraries have Encrust results. Best value per metric per library bolded ; second-best underlined. 

Library System Ptr.Decl ↓ Ptr.Deref ↓ Unsafe LoC ↓ Unsafe Cast ↓ Unsafe Call ↓ Comp.Rate ↑ Correct. ↑ Clippy ↓

bzip2 

C2Rust 147 3,614 9,304 6,601 1,686 N/A 100% 254 

C2SaferRust 85 2,217 7,688 3,397 1,252 57.58 100% 417 

EvoC2Rust 65 391 1,459 548 327 83.00 0% N/A 

Encrust 79 384 1,907 886 572 93.94 100% 146 

genann 

C2Rust 48 158 557 231 116 N/A 100% 32 

C2SaferRust 38 127 479 174 102 57.14 100% 29 

EvoC2Rust 3 6 111 57 19 80.65 0% N/A 

Encrust 19 39 333 92 127 92.86 100% 59 lil 

C2Rust 416 1,674 5,416 2,231 1,729 N/A 100% 583 

C2SaferRust 391 983 4,519 1,241 1,651 47.65 100% 670 

EvoC2Rust 4 2 61 25 23 23.28 0% N/A 

Encrust 382 887 3,012 800 1,751 97.32 100% 698 optipng 

C2Rust 1,157 5,297 49,444 26,824 7,044 N/A 100% 4,964 

C2SaferRust 625 3,452 34,178 20,744 5,974 65.32 100% 4,984 

EvoC2Rust 820 4,488 40,486 22,775 5,217 63.59 0% N/A 

Encrust 634 2,087 37,111 18,548 6,117 96.76 100% 4,555 

qsort 

C2Rust 4 11 67 34 21 N/A 100% 7

C2SaferRust 1 0 14 5 4 80.00 100% 6

EvoC2Rust 0 1 26 21 8 87.50 0% N/A 

Encrust 1 0 45 19 22 100.00 100% 16 snudown 

C2Rust 56 287 1,678 1,809 449 N/A 100% 238 

C2SaferRust 21 113 869 591 313 74.19 100% 96 

EvoC2Rust 2 11 42 30 17 82.66 0% N/A 

Encrust 25 99 410 209 199 93.55 100% 69 

tulipindicators 

C2Rust 1,081 3,047 19,408 12,349 3,336 N/A 100% 943 

C2SaferRust 977 2,652 18,426 11,499 3,045 42.43 100% 727 

EvoC2Rust 149 119 702 291 157 53.49 0% N/A 

Encrust 865 1,169 15,781 8,716 3,031 92.25 100% 714 

urlparser 

C2Rust 82 89 1,627 573 832 N/A 100% 153 

C2SaferRust 76 36 1,039 394 517 36.36 100% 105 

EvoC2Rust 4 36 1,090 575 295 90.00 0% N/A 

Encrust 76 64 1,591 771 663 90.91 100% 196 

Total 

C2Rust 2,991 14,177 87,501 50,652 15,213 N/A 100% 7,174 

C2SaferRust 2,214 9,580 67,212 38,045 12,858 56.07 100% 7,034 

EvoC2Rust 1,047 5,054 43,977 24,322 6,063 61.74 0% N/A 

Encrust 2,081 4,729 60,190 30,041 12,482 95.09 100% 6,453 

Table 6. Ablation: incremental contribution of each phase, aggregated over the Coreutils (7 programs) and Laertes (8 libraries) benchmarks. Encrust Phase 1 = after Type-Directed Wrapper Elimination only; Encrust 

(Phase 1+2) = full pipeline. All metrics ↓ lower is better. 

Suite Configuration Ptr.Decl Ptr.Deref Unsafe LoC Unsafe Cast Unsafe Call Clippy Coreutils 

C2Rust 1,572 3,471 50,668 27,647 10,414 2,951 

Encrust Phase 1 886 1,585 27,424 11,227 9,659 1,463 

Encrust (Phase 1+2) 829 1,489 25,724 10,626 9,336 1,495 Laertes 

C2Rust 2,991 14,177 87,501 50,652 15,213 7,174 

Encrust Phase 1 2,269 8,278 69,009 36,107 13,795 6,465 

Encrust (Phase 1+2) 2,081 4,729 60,190 30,041 12,482 6,453 

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 23                                             

> Table 7. Phase 2 task completion breakdown aggregated over all 15 programs (7 Coreutils + 8 Laertes). Rate =Completed / Discovered. Avg. iters = mean agentic loop iterations per completed task.
> Task type Disc. Compl. Failed Rate Avg. iters
> static_mut 363 227 136 62.5% 21.8
> wrapper_removal 454 347 107 76.4% 20.6
> struct_migration 23 21 291.3% 10.7
> struct_use_migrate 15 14 193.3% 3.8
> function_translate 263 174 89 66.2% 23.7
> dead_code 15 7846.7% 18.3
> Total 1,133 790 343 69.7% 21.0

40-iteration budget. wrapper_removal is the most frequent task type (454 tasks) and achieves 76.4%, as most residual wrapper–safe pairs have tractable type mismatches given full codebase context. 

5 Limitations 

Test-vector coverage. Correctness is verified only for code paths exercised by the test suite; functions never called during testing are translated without behavioral verification. As reported in Tables 2 and 3, the covered fraction varies substantially across programs, so the true correctness of the full translated codebase cannot be guaranteed beyond the tested paths. 

TDWE completeness and agentic scope. Phase 1’s Type-Directed Wrapper Elimination operates on a best-effort basis: it successfully eliminates wrapper–safe function pairs for 79.9% of translated functions, but does not guarantee that the resulting safe function bodies are themselves free of resid-ual unsafe constructs such as raw pointer manipulation or unchecked indexing. Crucially, functions whose wrappers are removed by TDWE are not subsequently re-examined by the Phase 2 agentic loop, which targets only the task categories discovered in the post-TDWE codebase ( static_mut ,

wrapper_removal , struct_migration , function_translate , dead_code ). Any unsafe code that survives inside TDWE-translated function bodies outside these categories therefore remains in the final output without further refinement. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented ENCRUST , a two-phase pipeline that translates real-world C programs to safe Rust while guaranteeing behavioral equivalence throughout. The first phase, Encapsulated Substitution ,introduces an ABI-preserving wrapper pattern that decouples per-function type-signature changes from their call sites, enabling independent LLM-driven translation with silent rollback, followed by a deterministic type-directed wrapper elimination pass. The second phase, Agentic Refinement ,targets the residual unsafe constructs that exceed per-function scope, namely static mut globals, skipped wrapper pairs, and failed translations, through a tool-equipped LLM agent operating on the whole codebase under a baseline-aware verification gate that prevents correctness regressions. Evaluated on 15 programs spanning 197,706 lines of C, Encrust reduces unsafe lines of code by 37.8% over the C2Rust baseline while achieving 100% test-vector correctness on all programs. Phase 1 alone accounts for 34.3% of this reduction; Phase 2 contributes an additional 5.4% relative reduction by targeting unsafe constructs that are intractable within per-function scope by design, completing 790 of 1,133 discovered tasks at an average of 21.0 agentic loop iterations per task. Across both benchmark suites, Encrust surpasses C2SaferRust on unsafe-construct reduction while maintaining the same 100% test correctness, and unlike EvoC2Rust , achieves this reduction without sacrificing functional equivalence. These results demonstrate that decomposing the translation 

> Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018.

24 HoHyun Sim, Hyeonjoong Cho, Ali Shokri, Zhoulai Fu, and Binoy Ravindran 

problem into encapsulated per-function substitution followed by whole-codebase agentic refinement is an effective strategy for scaling correctness-preserving C-to-safe-Rust translation to real-world programs. Several directions remain open. Extending Phase 1 to handle inline assembly and setjmp /longjmp 

would widen the class of C programs within scope. Replacing GPT-4o with open-weight mod-els would reduce cost and improve reproducibility across model updates. Finally, integrating a lightweight static pointer-provenance analysis could expand the set of wrapper pairs eligible for elimination, closing the gap between Phase 1-only and full Encrust output on programs with heavy pointer arithmetic. 

Data-Availability Statement 

The test cases and data for Coreutils used in this paper are taken from the publicly available C2SaferRust repository [ 15 ]. The test vectors for Laertes will be made available on GitHub upon publication. 

References 

[1] Periklis Akritidis et al . 2010. Cling: A memory allocator to mitigate dangling pointers. In 19th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 10) .[2] Xuemeng Cai, Jiakun Liu, Xiping Huang, Yijun Yu, Haitao Wu, Chunmiao Li, Bo Wang, Imam Nur Bani Yusuf, and Lingxiao Jiang. 2025. Rustmap: Towards project-scale c-to-rust migration via program analysis and llm. In International Conference on Engineering of Complex Computer Systems . Springer, 283–302. [3] Saman Dehghan, Tianran Sun, Tianxiang Wu, Zihan Li, and Reyhaneh Jabbarvand. 2025. Translating Large-Scale C Repositories to Idiomatic Rust. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20617 (2025). [4] Mehmet Emre, Ryan Schroeder, Kyle Dewey, and Ben Hardekopf. 2021. Translating C to safer Rust. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 5, OOPSLA (2021), 1–29. [5] Hasan Ferit Eniser, Hanliang Zhang, Cristina David, Meng Wang, Maria Christakis, Brandon Paulsen, Joey Dodds, and Daniel Kroening. 2024. Towards translating real-world code with llms: A study of translating to rust. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11514 (2024). [6] Muhammad Farrukh, Smeet Shah, Baris Coskun, and Michalis Polychronakis. 2025. Safetrans: Llm-assisted transpilation from c to rust. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10708 (2025). [7] Andrea Fioraldi, Dominik Maier, Heiko Eißfeldt, and Marc Heuse. 2020. {AFL++ }: Combining incremental steps of fuzzing research. In 14th USENIX workshop on offensive technologies (WOOT 20) .[8] Galois. 2018. C2Rust. https://galois.com/blog/2018/08/c2rust/ [9] Jaemin Hong and Sukyoung Ryu. 2025. Type-migrating C-to-Rust translation using a large language model. Empirical Software Engineering 30, 1 (2025), 3. [10] Ralf Jung, Jacques-Henri Jourdan, Robbert Krebbers, and Derek Dreyer. 2018. RustBelt: Securing the Foundations of the Rust Programming Language. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 2, POPL (2018), 66:1–66:34. doi:10.1145/3158154 [11] Michael Ling, Yijun Yu, Haitao Wu, Yuan Wang, James R Cordy, and Ahmed E Hassan. 2022. In rust we trust: a transpiler from unsafe c to safer rust. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 44th international conference on software engineering: companion proceedings . 354–355. [12] Yuchen Liu, Junhao Hu, Yingdi Shan, Ge Li, Yanzhen Zou, Yihong Dong, and Tao Xie. 2025. LLMigrate: Transforming" Lazy" Large Language Models into Efficient Source Code Migrators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23791 (2025). [13] Feng Luo, Kexing Ji, Cuiyun Gao, Shuzheng Gao, Jia Feng, Kui Liu, Xin Xia, and Michael R Lyu. 2025. Integrating Rules and Semantics for LLM-Based C-to-Rust Translation. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) . IEEE, 685–696. [14] Nicholas D. Matsakis and Felix S. Klock. 2014. The Rust Language. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGAda Annual Conference on High Integrity Language Technology (HILT ’14) . ACM, 103–104. doi:10.1145/2663171.2663188 [15] Vikram Nitin, Rahul Krishna, Luiz Lemos do Valle, and Baishakhi Ray. 2025. C2 SAFERRUST: Transforming C Projects into Safer Rust with NeuroSymbolic Techniques. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2025). [16] Oleksii Oleksenko, Dmitrii Kuvaiskii, Pramod Bhatotia, Pascal Felber, and Christof Fetzer. 2017. Intel MPX explained: An empirical study of intel MPX and software-based bounds checking approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.00719 

(2017). Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018. ENCRUST: Encapsulated Substitution and Agentic Refinement on a Live Scaffold for Safe C-to-Rust Translation 25 

[17] Manish Shetty, Naman Jain, Adwait Godbole, Sanjit A Seshia, and Koushik Sen. 2024. Syzygy: Dual code-test c to (safe) rust translation using llms and dynamic analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14234 (2024). [18] Momoko Shiraishi, Yinzhi Cao, and Takahiro Shinagawa. 2024. SmartC2Rust: Iterative, Feedback-Driven C-to-Rust Translation via Large Language Models for Safety and Equivalence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10506 (2024). [19] László Szekeres, Mathias Payer, Tao Wei, and Dawn Song. 2013. SoK: Eternal War in Memory. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP ’13) . IEEE Computer Society, 48–62. doi:10.1109/SP.2013.13 [20] Chaofan Wang, Tingrui Yu, Beijun Shen, Jie Wang, Dong Chen, Wenrui Zhang, Yuling Shi, Chen Xie, and Xiaodong Gu. 2025. Evoc2rust: A skeleton-guided framework for project-level c-to-rust translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04295 

(2025). [21] Aidan ZH Yang, Yoshiki Takashima, Brandon Paulsen, Josiah Dodds, and Daniel Kroening. 2024. Vert: Verified equivalent rust transpilation with large language models as few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18852 (2024). [22] Hanliang Zhang, Cristina David, Yijun Yu, and Meng Wang. 2023. Ownership guided C to Rust translation. In 

International Conference on Computer Aided Verification . Springer, 459–482. [23] Tianyang Zhou, Ziyi Zhang, Haowen Lin, Somesh Jha, Mihai Christodorescu, Kirill Levchenko, and Varun Chan-drasekaran. 2025. SACTOR: LLM-Driven Correct and Idiomatic C to Rust Translation with Static Analysis and FFI-Based Verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12511 (2025). 

Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009 

Proc. ACM Program. Lang., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2018.